18th of December. No, I'll take it back. 20th of
December. 20th
of December.
Tell me about that. This was shortly after we
deployed to Kunming. Prior to that, the Japanese
had taken over so-called French Indochina at that
time. They were operating a training base out of
Hanoi to train their bomber pilots. And they had
used the route from Hanoi to Kualian and to Kunming
to bomb those cities, Kunming being a key city in
the southern part of China, and also a big air base,
and Kualian being another main supply base of the
southern part of China, the south central part.
And they had no opposition whatsoever. They sent
me green crews up there, just bombing the city and
the air base, trying to hit the air base. So when we
got up there, that's one of the things we began to
wait for. Well, as I say, we went up on the 14th and on
the 20th. Now, I'd been on, as soon as we got up
there, we went off on some scramble missions,
expecting them the very next day, 15th, 16th,
17th, and this was full of that for a while. So you
were waiting for the bombers to hit you from Hanoi,
but they didn't. We know for a fact that several
raids took off and shortly after they got over the
Chinese border, about halfway up the turnaround
went back. Why is that? We know they had their own
intelligence contacts in Kunming and they knew we
were up there and they knew we had scrambled to get
in the air. As a matter of fact, we had a Chinese spy
on the hillside right opposite the air base at
Hanoi. We knew exactly when they took off. And we
also had in China, and that's one thing that
General Chennault helped the Chinese develop in
the late 30s, was a ground observer core system
where the Chinese—we attempted to do that here in
the earlier days in NORAD and ADC in the United
States, which was useless. But over there, that's
all they had, and the ground observer core worked
with their meet telephone and signal systems, get
word about an air raid coming up to Kunming, and
that's how we were alerted. That's what we
scrambled on. Eventually, they got a few radars
over there through the land-leash system, but we
got word on the morning of the 20th that the raid had
taken off, and it was, I think it was 14 bombers.
Ten bombers. Ten bombers. Ten Japanese bombers
were en route. So you scrambled. We had about
20,000 feet just approaching Kunming. So you
scrambled. We knew they were on their way up, and I
think we were at 20,000 feet in an area southeast of
Kunming.
I think we had 14 airplanes. We had to divide what we
shot down by 14 people to get credit for our $500. We
know this. Not one single one of those 10 airplanes
ever got back across the Chinese border. No
kidding. You nailed all of them. But we didn't
account for them. In other words, the pilot didn't
come back and say, I shot this one down, I shot that
one. I came back and claimed two probables. It was
my first combat. I had gotten so close to one, you
know, my ego was like a toilet bowl. We just
couldn't wait. And once the fighting started...
Well, tell me when it started. Tell me about that.
We climbed up. We knew they were coming. And the
usual taxes, we'd climb up to altitude about
20,000 feet. Now, you're getting higher than
20,000 feet in a P-40, and, you know, you just have
to operate at max volume. You don't have any
reserves. And generally, the Japanese never flew
above about 18,000 feet. So that gave us about
2,000 foot altitude, which is all we needed. Well,
coming down on top of them, you know, you'd pick up
speed. And we'd have a band of speed, and I'd hit and
run and come back, hit and run, peel off, come back,
hit and run. And we finally saw this formation. All
of them were in one formation of ten of them, a V. And
of course, they had the right to come in. We
immediately started attacking them. Once we
started the attack, we were in elements of four,
about, I think it was fourteen airplanes. And
three or four in each? Four in each section, so it
had to be two of us separate. And which ones in the V
did you strike out first? Well, whenever, the
minute we saw them, we started after them. Well, of
course, all fourteen airplanes didn't arrive at
the same time. See, in the formation we'd have,
we'd have what's called The attack section would
be four. There would be a support section about
maybe 1,000 feet higher than them, a little behind
them. Yeah. And then the reserve, another four at
the top altitude, maybe 1,000 feet above, still
further behind them. Sure. And, of course,
everybody's looking, and we're flying back into
loose formation to stand together to keep the
airplanes within sight of each other. Once you saw
the formation, you know, you pass a word, and
everybody sees the formation. Sure. Well, then,
of course, everybody pushes forward and gets
there and maybe checks their guns even. And then we
start, well of course, the closest flights of one,
that's another thing that was peculiar to some.
The first guy that got there was the first guy, I
mean the one nearest was always the first one that
got there. And from then on, boy, it was a fight
about getting in your position. I've had to be
amongst the pilots to get the attack, to make the
first attack on the bomber. It was that eager. The
first airplane, of course, in the lead, the boys
would see him at the same time. He's the first one to
go make the attack. Well, the rest of them then come
by, and then, you know, you're peeling around to
come back. And from then on, boy, it's a fight as to
who's going to do it, like a bunch of chickens
getting up there, birds, I mean, as to who's going
to get in there and make that attack. And several
times, I remember just about ready to, you know, my
attack, to start firing, here's a P-40 coming and
slip, you know, he turned and turned, and he
slipped right in front of me, and I couldn't shoot.
because he was trying to get in there and shoot too.
We were just absolutely swarming all of them.
That's the correct word. Just swarming. And
whether it was another guy flying on my wing, I was
letting him fly forward. You were in the attack
four. I didn't know yet. You were in the attack
four. What about the other eight now? Pretty soon
they all came. They couldn't stay out. Oh, no, all
of them. I don't know who shot who down, but I do know
I came back and had some... I had some holes in my
rear right tail fin, tail stabilizer, and I had to
have those patched up. And I claimed two
probables, but we saw about four airplanes go down
during the time we was fighting them. Actually saw
four fall out of formation, because they
immediately turned and started running. But we
got word from our intelligence that not one single
airplane of those got back to base. But we only
claimed, I think we claimed credit for four. And we
divided the four 2,000 bucks among 14 of us,
because we're not sure, you know, who knocked who
down. And subsequent fights, particularly
between fighters and fighters, you know, where
you're maneuvering, you know whether you're
going to shoot this guy down or not, because you're
the only one behind him. Now, did you have a camera
in the nose of the plane? No. We had cameras. We had
one P-40 that eventually we tried to put a camera in
to use as a reconnaissance airplane, but... The
basis on which we claimed aircraft was the
polished word plus your wingman or another guy
seeing it go down. That's the basis on which we
claimed. Sometimes, I dare say there may have been
a little bit of cheating on it, but I don't think
there was very much. I know this, the number that we
shot down. For instance, the British
intelligence When we evacuated Burma and, you
know, then finally ran the Japanese down, the
British intelligence claimed that there were
almost 600 Japanese airplanes, wrecked
airplanes, found in the southern part of Burma,
and I know we didn't claim over 120 or something
like that. But, now when these bombers saw you,
when these ten bombers saw you, did they, did they
try to put up a fight and get to their bombing
objective? Or did they just turn and run? They
mainly made a gradual turn, stayed in perfect
formation. They never broke formation. I give
credit for that. Boy, they stayed right in
formation. See, that's the only defense. Of
course, we'd pick the guys off from each end. We'd
pick the last man on the Vs. Yeah, because they did
have a little return rear-firing gun in a bucket
that fell down and went back. The rear gunner would
shoot back. you get behind, you know, get in the
middle of the V, trying to shoot down the middle one
down, you've got all this fire, where if you come on
the end, my favorite tactics, and many others did
the same thing, was to get way out, you know, where
you have altitude, and come down, get, come down
next to him, was to get, pick up speed, and then come
up at a lower, about a lower quarter attack, and
shoot, and then break off. That was my favorite
tactic. And that was my best gunnery. had my
gunnery, had I been, you know, had time to be really
trained, had I been a typical fighter train pilot,
like the average American fighter pilot, I'm sure
I could have had 50 to 60 airplanes of my credit. But
I just wasn't trained in gunnery, aerial gunnery.
See, I was, ever since I graduated, I was in B-17.
Uh, so you people did see four drop, and those were
the last four. Uh, Well, that's when we broke off
the time, see. Why'd you break off the time? Well,
we were getting, we caught on southeast of, uh, of,
uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of,
uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, of And allow a
little bit to get maybe lost, you know, in trying to
find yourself again. Pretty soon you break off the
combat and it, and of course, the little
commercial radios we had, sometimes you hear the
boss, I mean the commander call in and say, okay,
it's breaking off, go back. And sometimes you
don't, you just do it on your own. And a lot of our
combat was that way, where they'd just, we'd wait
until the last one's dragging in. Some guys
wouldn't get back. So you guys were getting low on
gas? Oh, yeah. Did you lose any of your airplanes?
Oh, yeah. On this particular attack? I
don't think we lost any on that.
Sandy began calling us off and wagging his wings
for joining us. By this time, we were some 200 miles
from Columbia. Oh, I see. So you were 200 miles. 14
of us had taken off. Okay. And we couldn't afford to
lose any aircraft after such a fight.
We found a base landing. The strike was followed in
one by one.
We had critiqued the detail. We could treat the
flame, detail included. We had gotten four of the
bombers ashore and several more as probable. I
felt fairly convinced of having contributed to
the loss of that left wingman. We were in high
spirits, snarled with the ladies. It was our first
test of combat and our first test. We had not lost a
man. Not a man, no one, no wounded, or no, uh, right?
No.
When on the ground in the parking area, I found in my
maven's eye a bullet hole in my right aileron,
right stabilizer and rudder. I reflected back now
about that quiver in my coat. I remember that. I
remember this very day, all of a sudden, I felt it.
Your airplane was quivering? Yeah, and the stick.
Oh, I see. The rudder, the whole airplane. Boy, you
get bullet holes in your airplane. So it was
quivering, and you were coming in for a landing,
and you were— No, no, that's when, actually in
combat, I got the return fire from one of the
bombers. Oh, I see. See, that's when a bullet hole
went through my—that's when a bullet hole went
through. Oh, this happened in combat, too. I bet
you Chenault was really happy with you. Oh, yeah.
And that reminds me, let me make one comment before
I close. I know you're going to ask this question.
Sure, go right ahead. You know what?
Now this is subsequent to, this one I was down in
Rangoon later on, but I just want to make this
comment to you now. This was in a fight, I think my
first fight with Japanese fighters. Well, we're
going to go through all of these. We're going to
continue on these missions.
Well, this is when I shot down three airplanes in
combat. Well, we're going to get to that.
Unbelievable. This is our only day.
Unbelievable. Yet, I subsequently was to see the
same lopsided victories over and over. Expertise
from training, confidence, and high morale is a
hard combination to beat. When experience is
added, one becomes super.
To me, that's the explanation of the flying tiger.
We were unbeatable and we knew it. And It wasn't
Glenn's fault.
That first mission must have really blew them
around. Well, of course, right after that, the
boys at Rangoon began to get locked in combat
practically every day. They'd come up with
figures, you know, at the end of the day with nobody
lost and maybe
maybe 15 shot that. I think one day we shot down 21
airplanes and ran through them, 21 Japanese and
didn't lose a man. That's in four days of four
different fights. Well we're going to get to that
now. The first mission you had was the 20th of
December, what was the next one? For me, well
I don't actually remember getting in a fight with,
I've scrambled on some flights up at Cunnameen. By
the way, the bomber didn't come over for about two
or three weeks after that. No. About two or three,
ten days or anything. I remember scrambling
against- Did he ever hit the city? Never hit the
city again. No. One time about three- Did he ever
drop any bombs on the city? No. One time about, must
have been April or May. where we were dispersed at
Chongqing and Kuilin and practically no
airplanes would come in. I think they made a run up
there and did actually hit the city with two or
three bombers one night. But to answer your
question about the next fight, I was on several
scrambles out of Kunming where we know bombers
were on their way up, but they never got to the city
and we never saw them. I don't think I had actual
contact with the enemy until following late
January when my squadron, or I was, most of my
squadron was picked to go to Rangoon. Okay. Late
January 1942. At
Rangoon. Tell me about that.
On the...
January the 29th, 1942
was
my first fight at Rangoon and this is when one of
those typical fights. This is a typical fight we
had at Rangoon and we, our squadron was there until
the 27th or 28th of February at which time we had to
evacuate. We would fight two to four times a day
actually meeting the Japanese. I'd say about four
or five times out of each week. And this was what I'm
about to describe to you. It would be a typical
combat, typical fight. We had a We were at
Mingledon Air Base, RAF base at Rangoon, and we had
the benefit of an RAF radar that was installed
nearby to warn of the Japanese coming across from
the full main Singapore
mainland area.
We would take every airplane off we could get off.
And it'd be anywhere from, say, 8 to 10, maybe 12
sometimes. Plus, the British could touch, but
they'd have maybe two or three boosters or three or
four Hurricanes. They'd get them off. And we'd all
scramble, get off just as fast as we could. And
actually, I've seen flights thread each other at
the intersection of the runway in our haste to get
off. Personally, we never had an aircraft taken
off. I remember taking off several times, and
instead of going through the normal procedure of
checking the mags, you know, right and left mags, I
wouldn't do it because I knew darn well I'd have
such a drop that I'd just have a little bit of doubts
and I wouldn't take off. Who do you mean your mags?
That's a magneto. Oh, okay. You check the engines.
Okay, okay. And it's normal procedure, and this is
a proper plane. Sure. And... I knew I wouldn't take
off. I couldn't justify the takeoff, logically.
Why? Because of bad engine. Oh. And possibility of
it conking out on the air, then you lose the
airplane. Sure. In other words, it did need some
maintenance on it, tuning up or something. But
just go ahead and take off. Whatever runs good
enough, you know. And the minute you get off and get
your wheels tucked up and get all the garbage
tucked in, you know, and flying clean, you begin to
relax a little. And, of course, then is when you're
getting ready to get to fight. But then you begin to
relax. That was the most tense minutes is to hear
the scrambles fall. That's the shocking thing.
Then rush to your airplane, hoping that you can get
in the airplane, get everything on, get the
engines to it, and get off that runway before the
bomb maybe hits you or a strafe. That's the most
tense part of any scramble. But then, the minute
you get in the air, see, then you have
maneuverability. Maybe you get out of the way, and
you see them coming. And you haste to have a chance
to fight back, because you can point your airplane
at them and shoot. Then you begin to relax a little.
And then, of course, we'd join up, get up. Then we'd
immediately go to 20,000 feet, and then we'd start
circling. And like I say, there'd be, well,
there'd be at least a flight of four each. Now, if
there was an extra two, he'd tack on maybe a flight
of six. And the booster boys, maybe they'd be
nearby with three or four airplanes, maybe two.
And we'd be generally in the same area where we
could at least, you know, catch a glimpse of one
another. We wouldn't fly in tight formation. And
eventually, one of us would see this swirling mass
of Japanese fighters coming over on a fighter
suite. And I, it looked straight at me. Just a
straight, basically? Uh, yeah. And to catch us in
combat in the air with the idea of whipping us,
shooting us down. In other words, it was a battle,
air battle, to eventually wipe us out. They always
thought, I don't know why, they just never would
learn. They always thought they could destroy us.
They didn't figure we had many airplanes. And they
were right. We didn't have many. But they just
never did
succeed in knocking us out where we couldn't fight
back. And... there's no doubt we must have shaken
them up morale-wise. We're bound to because of the
odds. They knew what they lost. And yet every time
they come over, we still have eight or ten
airplanes up there. And you can imagine coming
over with 120 airplanes, seeing eight airplanes
against you, you know darn well, well, these guys
can't have many more. If we just keep up this few
days, we might lose some, but they're bound to lose
those. Well, we never did. But this is the way we'd
meet. And it'd be just a looked like a haggle of
bees, a swarm of bees. No formation at all, but they
would move. For them, for the Japanese, no
formation at all. And they'd move toward, you
know, always moving towards Rangoon, eventually
in Gages. This is how it was on the 29th of January.
Right. And somebody saw them, and then, of course,
all of us... They'd give us direction by ground,
you know, 10 miles north of Pei-Gu, which was a
little town outside of Ran-Gun, or just east of the
city, and at 18,000, something like that. We
always knew they were around 18,000, so
altitude-wise, we knew just about where to look.
And eventually, all of us see them. Now,
sometimes, one flight may never even see this.
You'd think it's impossible with that many
airplanes in the air. that guys wouldn't be able to
see it, but sometimes you just don't do it. I've
been up in the air, and sometimes I wouldn't see
them. And boy, it just killed me when I would. It
just killed me to come back. These guys had been
fighting, and I hadn't seen them. We'd make a point
to hoover over each other about this. But
eventually we saw all these airplanes, and then
we'd get in a fight. And again, it was the usual
tactics. Coming down from above and this swirly
massed airplane, these were little fighters,
little fixed, these were not zeroes at first when
we met. What were they? These were called I-96s and
I-97s. They were little fixed wing Japanese
fighters that reminded me of the early P-26. A
little monoplane, low wing, fixed landing gear,
real sharp looking airplane this day with a radial
engine on it. very maneuverable. They could
practically turn around in a common 50-foot lock.
What about armament? They had two little
7.5-millimeter gun guns. That's all? Very light
armament. And practically, I don't know whether
they even had an armor plate in them or not. How
about speed? Oh, very low compared to the P-40.
They'd probably cruise. They were an easy prey,
then. Oh, yes. These were. These were. But
extremely maneuverable. And if you ever let them
get on your tail, then you've had a problem. You've
just been out couldn't possibly out-turn them.
But you could out-power them. Oh, yeah. So, you
know, you do tactics. We'd come down and pick one of
them on the end, on the outside of the squirrel. And
I'd just grab mine, and my tactics were just like
all the rest of them. And I'd come down, pick out one
guy because of his position. I figured he'd be
about in the right position for me to be on his tail
when I got in firing position. And I'd just stay
right with him, completely ignoring all the rest
of them. And as I'd come in, There's your came in.
Okay, you're describing a situation. Yeah, I'm
coming in on the attack. As I get into position to
shoot, say maybe four or five hundred yards, then
close, with intention to close practically by
running over it, then I start firing. And I had, as I
say, a .430 caliber gun and a .250 caliber, hoping
all of them
would fire. Sometimes I'd hold my trigger down too
long, and I'd fire too long a burst, and heat up my
guns too fast. As a result, I'd have a stoppage on my
gun and have to cock them again, you know, get them
working again. For the 50s? For the 50s. Not for the
30s. Well, the 30s, a lot of times they'd get
stopped up, and I'd hit my, I'd go out of control,
and it wouldn't unstop. Many times I'd go on back to
the base, but none of them were for the 30s working
at all. But not on this particular plane. No.
You're moving in on this one. Oh, yeah. On this one
bird on the outside. And I'd close in on him, and
being a normal fighter pilot, he probably knew I
was coming in on him, and he'd wait until the last
minute to return. Sometimes he wouldn't. But in
this particular case, now there's many of these I
had, so I'll try to be, this is typical. But just
give me this example. Coming in on this guy, he saw
me. and turned at the last, very last, at the
correct second. And I tried to follow, but as I
followed, I'd gotten inside of this mess of
airplanes, and no doubt there'd been some on my
tail. So I chose not to follow, and I turned off. I
didn't even get to fire my gun at him. But then I
pulled off the side, gained a little more
altitude, didn't turn around and come back in, did
the same thing again. This time, I caught one about
the same way, and I closed in on him and started
firing. And I began to see smoke come off his
airplane and boil down the side of his cockpit. And
I remember practically, I felt as though I had to
lift my left wing to get over his right wing as I
passed by him. No kidding. And I looked back. You
were that close? Oh, yeah. Oh, goodness. You could
have touched him. Well, it seems that close, yeah.
I'd say easily within 50 feet, no doubt. Did you see
the pilot? No. One time I saw a pilot in an airplane.
As a matter of fact, it was in the same flight. I
looked back long enough to see this guy trailing
off and smoke going down and I figured I got him.
Then I remember that was the first airplane I shot
down. What was your feeling?
I squealed into the light and caught myself
laughing aloud, sitting there in my cockpit at
some 18,000 feet. Enough for him. Got one. There
you are, Hoffman, old boy. Just a few days before we
lost Hoffman in a fight with the Japs. He was one of
the oldest, as a matter of fact, he was the oldest
boy we had from the Navy. And he was in the other
squadron and was one of the first pilots we lost in
combat. I think we only lost eight. And That was my
reaction. Related?
It's a hell of a thing to say you're related about
killing somebody, but related doesn't describe
it. I was exuberant. I was just beside myself. And
then, of course, I wanted more. So then I pulled off
again to come back. So you banged off him. Yeah,
yeah. And he was going down. Yeah, to do the same
thing. And of course, all this time, You could look
across the whole area and you could see, you could
see smoke, streaming smoke of airplanes going
down. You could actually see, catch out of the
ground, burning airplanes. This is just a mass
dogfight like you might see in the old movies. And
the next one, I believe the next one was a head-on
attack. Yeah. I came in and I was going to do my same
little stunt, catching the guy on the end and all.
But just about time as I was approaching to get in my
firing run, I caught another Jap that evidently
had seen me and knew what I was going to do. And all of
a sudden here he appeared right in front of me and we
were hitting directly at each other. And it was
close enough to shoot, so both of us started
shooting. I could see, you know, when you shoot
your gun, the smoke curls over the wings,
trailing, and you see the smoke. He was shooting at
me, and I was shooting at him. And I didn't feel
anything hitting me, but I knew I was hitting him
because I began to see smoke curling coming from
the Indian cow along the two sides of the airplane.
And at the very last second, I was going to pull up.
But the very last second, apparently, he was going
to pull up and did. And I don't know how to describe
it, but just split second thing, you know. And I
started to pull up and then shoved forward
violently. And when I shoved forward, of course,
that's a negative force. And except for my seat
belt, I'd have thrown myself right through the
canopy, I'm sure, if it wasn't violent. But my head
hit the canopy. But everything turned black. as
his airplane passed over me, that's how close he
was. So we couldn't have missed each other more
than, we couldn't have missed each other more than
20, 25 feet, even closer. And then, of course, turn
around and look at him, and I saw him going down, and
I was close enough where I claimed him. Just like
the other one. He went down there right after that.
Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Matter of fact, I think I
followed him down a little. And I was, I remember I
was so tense and tight that, you know, just hardly
breathing. And then, not exuberant, but, you
know, just tense. And then as I watched him go down,
then I began to relax, and I started to get elated
and exuberant again. God damn, two or something
like that. And then, after I was over, I started
again, and this time I... They just keep doing
this. That's their formation. Why didn't they
stay in the middle? Why didn't they move out? Why
did they stick together just as a beehive?
Seemingly mutually supporting one another. And
of course we just picked off the side of them. Sure.
Especially with a quicker flying. Yeah, and then
the next one I think was similar to the first one
where I got him on a rear attack. And by this time...
Tell me about that. Tell me about this. Well, it's
similar to the first. I think I caught him from the
rear. And, oh, this is when I came past him, and our
speed differentiation was so small that I
actually passed him and could see him sitting in
fire in a cockpit. But, you know, just a quick pass
to look over. Say about 50 feet apart. So you came up
behind him. Yes. Similar to the first one, yeah.
And how far were you when you started shooting?
Oh, again, probably four or five hundred yards.
And then you just close up, you know, practically
run over him. And then he got to move over to get by
him. And he was obviously, I obviously killed him,
you know, way back because he didn't make any
effort to move at all. He just stayed right in the
same position, smoke coming back, black smoke,
and then he started going down real slow. And as I
passed by him, He was sitting in fire in the
cockpit. He was on fire? Oh yeah, he was dead.
Otherwise, he was bailed out. Sure. I don't ever
remember seeing Daphne bail out. What did you feel
like when you saw this man on fire? Well, I just
exuberant again. You know,
you don't get like a... a madman you just get by then
you get coldly calculating daring
confident you know you can do it sure
you're you've won nothing can hold you back it's
feeling of winning in As a combat pilot, a pilot has
a feeling of being victorious. You're good.
You've done your job. And you just feel elated. Not
nervous. The actual firing and attacking and
seeing him on fire, it's tense. But it's just like
I'm telling you, it's fitness. But then when you,
the afterthought or before is when you get tense.
and nervous about it, and a little bit scared
maybe. Of course, in between these attacks I'm
telling you about, I actually had made some
attacks and had to break it off because I found
airplanes on my tail, but they weren't close
enough to hit me. You were out of their range. Oh,
yeah. You continually, continually got your head
on a pedestal. If a guy doesn't get on your tail, you
can't get shot down. That's the old days. It
doesn't in the day for missiles, but in the old days
for guns. It's true. Subsequently, in the story
later on, I didn't do that and I got shot at. But by
that time, you know, we were nearing the end of
combat. The airplanes, you don't see many of your
P-40s around and their flights broken up more and
they started back, they make this swoop at 180
degrees and they're going back home. So, you know,
the fight's over. You just have, you know when to
quit. So, how long did the fight take? You shot
three down that day. That whole flight probably
took thirty-five minutes. That's all?
The longest time it takes is to climb the altitude,
get there, then when you see them, all that time. I
dare say the actual
combat shooting those three airplanes, and
probably one problem, actually the three
airplanes, one problem was it probably took— Tell
me about the problem. It's one I wasn't sure of.
Probably the same type of attack. I'd have to read
this to...
It's the same type of attack. Okay, but the whole
thing takes about 35 minutes. The whole thing
takes about 35 minutes, but the actual fighting,
engaging, couldn't take over 10 minutes. Except
for 8 minutes. That's always the way it is. And then
when you get down, you know, then of course, we're
not in formation with each other, but when you
start breaking off a meeting, you start looking
for a buddy. And no matter who it is, if it's P-40,
you go up and get together. You join. He may have
been your wingman, now you're flying on his wing,
but you get together. And then you start going back
to the base, and we'd arrive back to the base in
twos, ones, threes, and, you know, very seldom,
very seldom in the same, if ever. I can, well, maybe
one or two, I return to the base with, maybe my
wingman on the same position, but very, very
seldom. Now, this is the... Oh, did the Japanese
just start moving away then? Then they go back
home. I mean, they had decided they'd had enough,
right? So did they make up their mind at this
particular battle on the 29th of January, did they
make up their mind first that they'd had enough, or
did you people? Well, it's a tactic. See, they can
only fly so far and so long because of fuel, but
can't last too long, and... We know that, and they
know it. So it's almost a set pattern. You don't
just...
The time element is always in your mind, and where
you are, the navigation, has to always be in your
mind, or you'll never make it back. Or you'll run
out of gas. So it's just automatically when you
break off. And it's experience. It's experience.
And then we get back, and of course we...
Sometimes, if there's no worries about more
attacks or more waves of bombers or fighters
coming over, we'd by ourselves, we'd come over to
the field and do a slow roll, a victory roll, pull up
and land. Then we'd get down, of course, we'd get
together and have a critique and discuss all of
that. That's the way, by the end of one day, I forget
when it was, it was the latter part of February,
we'd been fighting about four, we'd fought the
Japanese four times in one day. And you see, this
was toward the end of the campaign when they were
about, well, they did force us out. See, the
intensity was such. And they achieved their
objective, they forced us out. We just drew the
rate from Rangoon. Then the ground forces, see,
were moving forward too. So if we'd stayed there
another 24 hours, we may not have got our ground
force up the highway enough. We actually
patrolled them the day we evacuated to be sure that
if any Japanese coming across the ground were
attacked, we'd at least give them some air
support.
I'm rambling an awful lot, but
you came back and you critiqued this battle of the
29th of January before we get to the ones in
February. What did your men think? Of course. How
many did you lose? We didn't lose any. You didn't
lose any. And how many did you claim? How many
victories did you claim?
I decided to call it a day. After all, I was getting
too far eastward from the field. Nearing the field
and after checking the tower, I did a slow roll
across the runway of the first victory roll in my
life. Landed and taxied toward the alert area at
the top center of the field.
While taxiing past the revetment, I saw quite a
crowd around one side of the enclosure. Closer
observation revealed a crashed Jap I-97 fighter.
Japanese pilot had apparently been shot out of the
air and he was making a last suicidal attempt to
crash into an old RAF Blenheim bomber in a
revetment on the field. See, all this fighting was
going on over the field, practically, which was
sheltered in a revetment. He had missed it by only a
few feet. An RAF airman, I want to read this to you
because I remember this so well. An RAF airman held
up a leather helmet with a Japanese pilot's head
still in it with parts of his throat hanging down in
a bloody mess. With his other hand, he pointed two
fingers skyward and the usual V for victory sign. I
returned the V sign and texted on. I could not,
however, return it broad grin.
So this RAF man? Ground man, yeah. Did the ground
man cut the Japanese head? No, no, in a crash.
Severed in a crash. In a crash, yeah, yeah.
Incidentally, I went over later on and got a gun
charging handle out of that airplane as a
souvenir. I still have it. A what handle? They
charge the gun manually with a little handle
that's got a wire on it, you know, that goes with the
gun in the wing. You just pull it up like you do a
stutter lawnmower. It's written in Japanese
letters, a gun charger, I guess. I don't know.
We critiqued our expenses over a cup of coffee.
There must have been at least I say 35 of these
fighters. We figured we got at least 16 of them. I
now believe I have shot down two aircraft. I had it
last done something.
Now, you said three. Three, yeah. Just a couple
minutes ago, and your diary says two. Well, this
is the fight where I only got two. I'll have to
describe the fight later on where I got three now.
Okay. So you'll believe me. Okay, this is... This
is the 29th of January, and you shot two? Two. Oh,
two in one probable. Two in one probable, okay. I
now believe I have shot down two aircraft. I had at
least done something. So that last one that you
came up on, that was another fight probably? Yeah.
So you shot one down how you described it, and the
second one how you described it, and then you got
a... In other words, did you see that? Was the man
that you saw on fire, was... That's what I'm trying
to think of. I remember that so vividly that that
may have been in the subject. Maybe that was on
another flight. When I get your manuscript, I'll
check this out. Now, this is as far as I got when the
first chapter, I don't know, May page, well,
chapter 126. Now, I'll have to,
well, this type of fighting went on. This was the
next day was the 30th of January. And how long did
you stay in Rangoon in these types of dogfights?
30th of January. From the 29th of January until the
22nd of Rangoon.
27th is
Rangoon.
I call these
chapters, but chapter 155 is the 155th day since I
left. San Francisco, but the day is 27 February
1942 in Rangoon.
And that's when you left? The 27th of February?
Yeah. 28th, yeah. So you were there from the 29th of
January until the 27th of February. That's right.
And English breakfast is something new to be
compared with that. Okay. Okay, so when... That
was the mission of the 29th of January, where you
hit two and one probable. What was your, and you
were doing, you were having a lot of these
dogfights during that entire month then, during
the month of February. I think when I left,
I got credit for two and a half at Chiang Mai. I think
when I left there, I had seven aircraft to my
credit.
Okay. Yeah. Because I was officially paid for nine
and a quarter airplanes. Okay, so you had two and a
half. No, you don't get paid for half. In that case,
probably, we didn't get paid for half. Oh, okay.
But in the raid at Chiang Mai, Thailand, which I'll
tell you later on about, I was paid for nine and a
quarter airplanes. On the raid at Chiang Mai, we—
burned up so many airplanes there that we just
divided them amongst the four of us that attacked.
And it came out where I got two and a quarter.
Because we couldn't prove anything. And got
credit for two and a quarter. So that left me seven
airplanes. And I didn't shoot any airplanes down.